---
layout: post
title: "Using GNU Global with C++ and Git"
date: 2016-02-23 20:19:20 +0100
updated: 2016-02-24 17:22:20 +0100
categories: programming
disqus: true
tags: tools git c++ gnu global
---

<p class="lead">
<a href="https://www.gnu.org/software/global/">GNU global</a> is a very
compelling way to quickly search your project from the command line.  Here I
show how to index your code and update it automatically when using git.
</p>

Indexing your code
------------------

To index your code, simply run the following in your project root directory:

    $ gtags

This will parse your code for tags and create the database files `GPATH`,
`GRTAGS` and `GTAGS`. It's blazing fast, too: A project with several million
lines of code took only seven seconds on my workstation.

For C++ projects, note that `gtags` may interpret `.h` files as C code. You can
fix that up with `~/.globalrc`, but so far I haven't had any big problem with
that.

Querying the code
-----------------

Now that you have indexed your project, you can query for specific tags by
typing `global name`. For example, to see the definition for `value_t`, just
type

    $ global value_t
    lib/optional/libffi/ffi.cpp

Add `-x` to get a code excerpt:

    $ global -x value_t
    value_t            28 lib/optional/libffi/ffi.cpp struct value_t {

To see where `value_t` is referenced, add `-r`:

    $ global -xr value_t
    value_t           415 lib/optional/libffi/ffi.cpp   value_t *retval = new value_t(size);
    value_t           463 lib/optional/libffi/ffi.cpp   value_t* value = static_cast<value_t*>(car(p)->pointer->value);
    value_t           471 lib/optional/libffi/ffi.cpp   value_t* value = static_cast<value_t*>(car(p)->pointer->value);
    value_t           479 lib/optional/libffi/ffi.cpp   value_t* value = static_cast<value_t*>(car(p)->pointer->value);
    value_t           487 lib/optional/libffi/ffi.cpp   value_t* value = static_cast<value_t*>(car(p)->pointer->value);
    value_t           495 lib/optional/libffi/ffi.cpp   value_t* value = static_cast<value_t*>(car(p)->pointer->value);
    value_t           503 lib/optional/libffi/ffi.cpp   value_t* value = static_cast<value_t*>(car(p)->pointer->value);
    value_t           511 lib/optional/libffi/ffi.cpp   value_t* value = static_cast<value_t*>(car(p)->pointer->value);

You can also use `-g` to grep, so you don't have to spell out the correct name:

    $ global -xg make_clo
    make_clo           34 include/mickey/eval.h cons_t* make_closure(cons_t* args, cons_t* body, environment_t* e);
    make_clo          371 src/core-transition.cpp    * (or we could call make_closure here):
    make_clo          218 src/eval.cpp               cons_t *closure = make_closure(def_args, def_body, e->extend());
    make_clo          272 src/eval.cpp             return make_closure(args, body, e->extend());
    make_clo          613 src/library/scheme-base.cpp    * (or we could call make_closure here):
    make_clo           60 src/library/srfi-16.cpp   return make_closure(symbol("args"), cons(cond_cases), e);
    make_clo           14 src/make-closure.cpp cons_t* make_closure(cons_t* args, cons_t* body, environment_t* e)

You can also use regular expressions with `-e`. See `man global` for many other
options.

Pro tip: Create an alias for `global`:

    $ alias gx='global -x'
    $ gx main
    main              144 src/mickey.cpp   int main(int argc, char** argv)
    $ gx -r make_closure
    make_closure       34 include/mickey/eval.h cons_t* make_closure(cons_t* args, cons_t* body, environment_t* e);
    make_closure      218 src/eval.cpp               cons_t *closure = make_closure(def_args, def_body, e->extend());
    make_closure      272 src/eval.cpp             return make_closure(args, body, e->extend());
    make_closure       60 src/library/srfi-16.cpp   return make_closure(symbol("args"), cons(cond_cases), e);

There is also the `gtags-cscope` utility. It lets you interactively search for
stuff and open an editor. I'm not sure I'll be using it much, but it's there.

Automatically syncing gtags on git updates
------------------------------------------

At work, I've set up so that the tag-files are automatically updated whenever
git changes the files on disk, for example when I fetch and checkout,
cherry-pick and so on. I'll show how to do that.

First, add `GPATH`, `GRTAGS` and `GTAGS` to `.gitignore`:

    $ echo "GPATH\nGRTAGS\nGTAGS" >> .gitignore

Next, you need to set up some git hooks.  The whole approach here is taken from
[Effortless Ctags with
Git](http://tbaggery.com/2011/08/08/effortless-ctags-with-git.html) by Tim
Pope, and slightly modified to work with GNU global.

Put the below script in `.git/hooks/gtags`:

    #! /bin/sh
    set -e
    dir="`git rev-parse --git-dir`"
    trap 'rm -f "$dir/$$.gtags"' EXIT
    mkdir "$dir/$$.gtags"
    git ls-files | \
        gtags --file=- --skip-unreadable "$dir/$$.gtags"
    mv $dir/$$.gtags/* "$dir/.."

Unfortunately, GNU global doesn't allow relative paths in the environment
variable `GTAGSROOT`, so we can't store the database under `.git`.

Put the following in `post-commit`, `post-merge`, `post-checkout`:

    #! /bin/sh
    .git/hooks/gtags >/dev/null 2>&1 &

Notice that it runs `gtags` in the background, which is nice.

Put this in `post-rewrite`:

    #! /bin/sh
    case "$1" in
      rebase) exec .git/hooks/post-merge ;;
    esac

For an explanation of the above hooks, look at the post by Tim Pope above. It
suggests putting them in a git template directory, which means they are
automatically copied over to new or cloned repositories.

Finally, make them executable:

    $ chmod +x .git/hooks/gtags \
               .git/hooks/post-commit \
               .git/hooks/post-merge \
               .git/hooks/post-checkout \
               .git/hooks/post-rewrite

Now, whenever you checkout etc., the index will be updated.

As Tim Pope writes, you can even create a command `git gtags` so you can update
on demand:

    $ git config --global alias.gtags '!.git/hooks/gtags'

This lets you do

    $ git gtags

to manually update the database. However, if you have only changed a few files
and want to re-index, you might be better off using `global -u` to perform an
update. It could be faster.
