---
layout: post
title: "Making a simple virtual machine interpreter in Python"
date: 2015-01-28 21:59:50 +0100
updated: 2016-01-23 22:31:00 +0100
categories: Python
disqus: true
tags: Python
---

<p class="lead">

I was asked if I could write a simple blog post on how to make a
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stack_machine">(process) virtual
machine</a> &mdash; specifically, a
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_machine">stack machine</a>.
Using Python, I'm going to convince you how easy it is!

</p>

**Update**: Based on [comments from r/Python][r/Python], I've made some small
code changes. Thanks to robin-gvx, bs4h and Dagur! The code in this post is now
available on [GitHub][github].

A stack machine doesn't have [registers][register-machine]. Instead, it puts
values on a stack and operate on that.  Stack machines are extremely simple,
but very powerful. There's a reason why Python, Java, PostScript,
[Forth][forth] and many other languages have chosen a stack machine as their
VM.

Anyway, let's talk a little bit more about the stacks. We need an instruction
pointer stack, which we'll use to store return addresses. This is so that we
can call a subroutine (a function, for instance) and then jump back from where
we came. We *could* have used self-modifying code instead, like Donald Knuth's
original [MIX][mix] did, but then you'd have to manage a stack yourself if you
wanted recursion to work.  In this post, I won't really implement subroutine
calls, but they're trivial anyway (consider it an exercise).

With the _data stack_ you get a lot of stuff for free.  For instance, consider
an expression like `(2+3)*4`.  On a stack machine, the equivalent code for this
expression would be `2 3 + 4 *`: Push two and three on the stack, then the next
instruction is `+`, so pop off two numbers and push back the sum.  Next, push
four on the stack, then pop two values and push their product. Easy!

So, let's start writing a simple class for a stack.  We'll just inherit from
`collections.deque`:

    from collections import deque

    class Stack(deque):
        push = deque.append

        def top(self):
            return self[-1]

We can now `push` and `pop` to this stack and peek at the top value with `top`.

Next, let's make a class for the virtual machine itself. As noted, we need two
stacks and also some memory for the code itself. We'll rely on Python's dynamic
typing so we can put anything in the list. Only problem is that we really don't
discern between strings and built-in functions. The correct way would be to
insert actual Python functions in the list. Perhaps I'll do that in a future
update.

We also need an instruction pointer, pointing to the next item to execute in
the code.

    class Machine:
        def __init__(self, code):
            self.data_stack = Stack()
            self.return_addr_stack = Stack()
            self.instruction_pointer = 0
            self.code = code
            self.dispatch_map = {...} # see below for values

Now we'll create some convenience functions to reduce some typing:

        def pop(self):
            return self.data_stack.pop()

        def push(self, value):
            self.data_stack.push(value)

        def top(self):
            return self.data_stack.top()

We'll create a `dispatch` function that takes an "opcode" (we don't really use
codes, just dynamic types, but you get my point) and executes it. But first,
let's just create the interpreter loop:

        def run(self):
            while self.instruction_pointer < len(self.code):
                opcode = self.code[self.instruction_pointer]
                self.instruction_pointer += 1
                self.dispatch(opcode)

As you can see, it does one thing, and does it pretty well: Fetch the next
instruction, increment the instruction pointer and then dispatch based on the
opcode.  The `dispatch` function is a tad more longer:

        def dispatch(self, op):
            if op in self.dispatch_map:
                self.dispatch_map[op]()
            elif isinstance(op, int):
                # push numbers on the data stack
                self.push(op)
            elif isinstance(op, str) and op[0]==op[-1]=='"':
                # push quoted strings on the data stack
                self.push(op[1:-1])
            else:
                raise RuntimeError("Unknown opcode: '%s'" % op)

**Update:** The `dispatch_map` referenced in `__init__` should contain the
values below. It used to be constructed in `dispatch`, but as [EnTerr][EnTerr]
pointed out in the comments below, that is grossly inefficient.

        dispatch_map = {
            "%":        self.mod,
            "*":        self.mul,
            "+":        self.plus,
            "-":        self.minus,
            "/":        self.div,
            "==":       self.eq,
            "cast_int": self.cast_int,
            "cast_str": self.cast_str,
            "drop":     self.drop,
            "dup":      self.dup,
            "if":       self.if_stmt,
            "jmp":      self.jmp,
            "over":     self.over,
            "print":    self.print_,
            "println":  self.println,
            "read":     self.read,
            "stack":    self.dump_stack,
            "swap":     self.swap,
        }

Basically, `dispatch` looks up the opcode, and sees if it's a built-in function
like `*` or `drop` or `dup`.  By the way, those are [Forth][forth] words, a
brilliant language that you should check out.  In fact, the code you'll see
here is basically a simple Forth.

Anyway, it looks up an opcode like `*`, sees it should call `self.mul` then
executes it. It looks like this:

        def mul(self):
            self.push(self.pop() * self.pop())

All the other functions are like this.  If it can't find the operation in the
dispatch map, it will first see if it's a number. Numbers are automatically
pushed on the data stack.  If it's a quoted string, it will push that.

So, there you have it! Congrats!

Let's define a few more operations, then write a program using our newly
designed virtual machine and [p-code language][p-code]:

        # Allow to use "print" as a name for our own method:
        from __future__ import print_function

        # ...

        def plus(self):
            self.push(self.pop() + self.pop())

        def minus(self):
            last = self.pop()
            self.push(self.pop() - last)

        def mul(self):
            self.push(self.pop() * self.pop())

        def div(self):
            last = self.pop()
            self.push(self.pop() / last)

        def print(self):
            sys.stdout.write(str(self.pop()))
            sys.stdout.flush()

        def println(self):
            sys.stdout.write("%s\n" % self.pop())
            sys.stdout.flush()

Let's write that `print((2+3)*4)` example using our virtual machine:

    Machine([2, 3, "+", 4, "*", "println"]).run()

You can even try running it!

Now, let's introduce a jump operation, a _go-to_ operation:

        def jmp(self):
            addr = self.pop()
            if isinstance(addr, int) and 0 <= addr < len(self.code):
                self.instruction_pointer = addr
            else:
                raise RuntimeError("JMP address must be a valid integer.")

It just changes the instruction pointer.  Now let's look at branching:

        def if_stmt(self):
            false_clause = self.pop()
            true_clause = self.pop()
            test = self.pop()
            self.push(true_clause if test else false_clause)

This is also very straight-forward. If you wanted to add a conditional jump,
you'd have to simply do `test-value true-value false-value IF JMP`.  (As
branching is performed often, many VMs provide instructions like `JNE`, "jump
if not equal", for convenience).

Here's a program that asks the user for two numbers, then prints their sum and
product:

    Machine([
        '"Enter a number: "', "print", "read", "cast_int",
        '"Enter another number: "', "print", "read", "cast_int",
        "over", "over",
        '"Their sum is: "', "print", "+", "println",
        '"Their product is: "', "print", "*", "println"
    ]).run()

The `over`, `read` and `cast_int` operations look like this:

        def cast_int(self):
            self.push(int(self.pop()))

        def over(self):
            b = self.pop()
            a = self.pop()
            self.push(a)
            self.push(b)
            self.push(a)

        def read(self):
            self.push(raw_input())

Here's a simple program that asks the user for a number, prints if it's even or
odd, then loops:

    Machine([
        '"Enter a number: "', "print", "read", "cast_int",
        '"The number "', "print", "dup", "print", '" is "', "print",
        2, "%", 0, "==", '"even."', '"odd."', "if", "println",
        0, "jmp" # loop forever!
    ]).run()

Now, some exercises for you: Create `call` and `return` commands. The `call`
will push its current address on the return stack, then call `self.jmp()`.
The `return` operation should simply pop the return stack and set the
instruction pointer to this value (jumps back, or _returns_ from a `call`).
When you've done that, you've got subroutines. 

A simple parser for this language
---------------------------------

Let's create a small language that mimics the code.  We'll _compile_ to our
machine code:

    import tokenize
    from StringIO import StringIO

    # ...

    def parse(text):
        tokens = tokenize.generate_tokens(StringIO(text).readline)
        for toknum, tokval, _, _, _ in tokens:
            if toknum == tokenize.NUMBER:
                yield int(tokval)
            elif toknum in [tokenize.OP, tokenize.STRING, tokenize.NAME]:
                yield tokval
            elif toknum == tokenize.ENDMARKER:
                break
            else:
                raise RuntimeError("Unknown token %s: '%s'" %
                        (tokenize.tok_name[toknum], tokval))

A simple optimizer: Constant folding
------------------------------------

[Constant folding][constant folding] is an example of [peephole
optimization][peephole optimization] that looks for obvious pieces of code that
can be precomputed at compile time.  For instance, mathematical expressions
involving constants, e.g. `2 3 +`.  That should be quite simple to implement.

    def constant_fold(code):
        """Constant-folds simple mathematical expressions like 2 3 + to 5."""
        while True:
            # Find two consecutive numbers and an arithmetic operator
            for i, (a, b, op) in enumerate(zip(code, code[1:], code[2:])):
                if isinstance(a, int) and isinstance(b, int) \
                        and op in {"+", "-", "*", "/"}:
                    m = Machine((a, b, op))
                    m.run()
                    code[i:i+3] = [m.top()]
                    print("Constant-folded %s%s%s to %s" % (a,op,b,m.top()))
                    break
            else:
                break
        return code

The only problem with this approach is that we would have to update jump
locations, and that is hard to do in many cases (e.g. `read cast_int jmp`).
There are many solutions to this, but a simple work-around is to only allow
jumping to named labels in the _language_, then resolve their actual locations
after doing optimizations.

If you implement Forth _words_, or functions, you can do more optimizations,
like removing code that is provably never used (also known as [dead code
elimination][dead code elimination]).

A REPL
------

Now we can make a simple REPL like so:

    def repl():
        print('Hit CTRL+D or type "exit" to quit.')

        while True:
            try:
                source = raw_input("> ")
                code = list(parse(source))
                code = constant_fold(code)
                Machine(code).run()
            except (RuntimeError, IndexError) as e:
                print("IndexError: %s" % e)
            except KeyboardInterrupt:
                print("\nKeyboardInterrupt")

We can thus test some simple programs:

    > 2 3 + 4 * println
    Constant-folded 2+3 to 5
    Constant-folded 5*4 to 20
    20
    > 12 dup * println
    144
    > "Hello, world!" dup println println
    Hello, world!
    Hello, world!

As you can see, the constant-folder seems to work great!  In the first example,
it optimizes away all the code down to simply `20 println`.

Next steps
----------

When you have added `call` and `return`, you can let the user define new
functions.  In [Forth][forth], functions are called _words_ and they begin with
a colon, a name and ends with a semicolon.  For example, an integer square word
would be:

    : square dup * ;

You can actually try this out in a program like [Gforth][gforth]:

    $ gforth
    Gforth 0.7.3, Copyright (C) 1995-2008 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
    Gforth comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; for details type `license'
    Type `bye' to exit
    : square dup * ;  ok
    12 square . 144  ok

You can also add support for this by looking for `:` in the parser. When you
find one, you need to record the name to insert the name along with an address
(e.g., the current position in the code) and insert them into a [symbol
table][symbol-table].  For simplicity, you could probably even do better by
just inserting the whole code up to the concluding semicolon in a dictionary,
e.g.:

    symbol_table = {
      "square": ["dup", "*"]
      # ...
    }

When you're finished parsing, you can [link][linker] the program: Go through
the main code and look for calls to user-defined functions in the symbol table.
Whenever you find one, add that code to the _end_ of the main code, unless it's
already there. Then replace the `square` operation with a `<address>` `call`,
where `<address>` is the location where the word/function was inserted.

For this to work correctly, you should consider removing the `jmp` instruction.
Otherwise, you'll have to resolve them as well.  It *can* work, but then you
have to keep track of their references in the same order that the user wrote
the program. I.e., if you want to move around subroutines, you have to be a bit
careful. It's fully doable, though.  You should probably also add an `exit`
function to stop the program (perhaps with an exit-code to the OS?), so that
the main code execution won't continue running into the subroutines.

Actually, a good program layout would probably be to put the main code in a
subroutine itself, called `main`.  Or whatever, you decide!

As you can see, this is a lot of fun and teaches you a lot about code
generation, linking, program space layout and so on.

Even more cool things to do
---------------------------

You could use a Python bytecode generation library to attempt to translate the
VM code to native Python bytecode.  Or implement it in Java and do it on the
JVM; then you'll get [JITing][jit] for free!

Also, it would be cool to try to make a [register machine][register-machine].
You could try to implement a [call stack][call stack] with
[stack frames][stack frames] and establish a calling convention.

Finally, if you don't like the Forth-like language defined here, you can create
your own simple language that compiles down to this VM.  For instance, you
should be able to convert infix notation like `(2+3)*4` to `2 3 + 4 *` and emit
code for your VM.  You could allow for C-style code blocks a la `{ ... }` so
that a statement like `if ( test )` `{ ... }` `else` `{ ... }` would be
translated to:

    <true/false test>
    <address of true block>
    <address of false block>
    if
    jmp

    <true block>
    <address of end of entire if-statement> jmp

    <false block>
    <address of end of entire if-statement> jmp

For instance,

    Address  Code
    -------  ----
     0       2 3 >
     3       7        # Address of true-block
     4       11       # Address of false-block
     5       if
     6       jmp      # Conditional jump based on test

    # True-block
     7       "Two is greater than three."
     8       println
     9       15       # Continue main program
    10       jmp

    # False-block ("else { ... }")
    11       "Two is less than three."
    12       println
    13       15       # Continue main program
    14       jmp

    # If-statement finished, main program continues here
    15       ...

Oh, you also need to add the comparison operators `!= < <= > >=` for this to
work.

[I've done some of these things in my C++ stack machine][csl-stack-machine], so
you can get some hints from there.

I've also turned the code here into a project called [Crianza][code]. It has
more optimizations and an experimental mode to compile down to Python bytecode.

The complete code
-----------------

The complete code is available at [vm.py on github][vm.py].

[EnTerr]: https://csl.name/post/vm/#comment-2467436000
[call stack]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Call_stack
[code]: https://github.com/cslarsen/crianza
[constant folding]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constant_folding
[csl-stack-machine]: https://github.com/cslarsen/stack-machine
[dead code elimination]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_code_elimination
[forth]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forth_(programming_language)
[gforth]: https://www.gnu.org/software/gforth/
[github]: https://github.com/cslarsen/python-simple-vm
[jit]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Just-in-time_compilation
[linker]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linker_(computing)
[mix]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MIX
[p-code]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/P-code_machine
[peephole optimization]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peephole_optimization
[process-vm]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_machine#Process_virtual_machines
[r/Python]: https://pay.reddit.com/r/Python/comments/35tg6b/making_a_simple_vm_interpreter_in_python/
[register-machine]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Register_machine
[stack frames]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Call_stack#STACK-FRAME
[symbol-table]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symbol_table
[vm.py]: https://github.com/cslarsen/python-simple-vm/blob/master/vm.py
