---
layout: post
title: "Commodore 64 assembly coding on the command line"
date: 2016-05-06 21:37:13 +0000
updated: 2016-05-07 00:15:55 +02:00
categories: programming
disqus: true
tags: c64 assembly
---

<p class="lead">
Have you ever had this nagging feeling that you're less worth because you never
actually coded assembly on the C64? Of course you have! Fortunately, here's how
you can finally do something about it, using the OS X or Linux command line.
</p>

Fun fact: The original Lucasfilm Commodore 64 games, such as Maniac Mansion,
were cross-compiled on UNIX workstations, transferred over the network and
uploaded to running C64s â€” way back in 1987! (Source: The <a
href="https://blog.thimbleweedpark.com">Thimbleweed Park podcasts</a>, which I
highly recommend.) That's an excellent workflow that we'll mimic here. But
instead of using real C64s, we'll be using the <a
href="http://vice-emu.sourceforge.net">VICE</a> emulator.

By the way, if you happen to be a fan of Sublime, you can download a complete
package over at <a
href="http://dustlayer.com/c64-coding-tutorials/2013/2/10/dust-c64-command-line-tool">Dustlayer</a>.
Here, we'll be using good old `make` and the <a
href="https://web.archive.org/web/20150520143433/https://www.esw-heim.tu-clausthal.de/~marco/smorbrod/acme/">ACME
assembler</a>.

Installing the tools
--------------------

To install ACME and VICE on OSX,

    $ brew install acme vice

On Linux, you *may* find those in your package manager. If you don't, just
download VICE and compile from source. It's really simple and straight forward,
and you get the C64 ROMs with the source (but not with the binary packages).
Just don't install to a non-standard location; VICE didn't like that the last
time I tried. The ACME assembler is very old, but should be <a
href="https://web.archive.org/web/20150520143433/https://www.esw-heim.tu-clausthal.de/~marco/smorbrod/acme/">readily
available from archive.org</a> . It's very small and doesn't even have a kludgy
`configure` script, if I recall correctly.

To compile a C64 assembly file with ACME, type

    $ acme --cpu 6510 --outfile foo.prg foo.asm

This produces `foo.prg`.  I am aware that the 6502 and the C64's 6510 CPUs are
supposed to be instruction set compatible; I pass `--cpu 6510` anyway, just in
case there should be minor ISA differences.

If you use the <a
href="https://github.com/actraiser/dust-tutorial-c64-first-intro">Dust demo</a>
(referenced above), you can type `acme index.asm` to compile it. Files are
placed in the `build` directory.

With VICE you can execute the `.prg` file directly, but using its `c1541`
utility you can also put them into `.d64` disk images. On OSX, the tool is
located in /Applications/Vice64/tools/c1541. For the Dust demo, the image can
be made with

    $ c1541 -format diskname,id d64 image_name.d64 -write build/hello_world.prg hello.prg

I've just used `diskname` as the name of the dist, and `id` as its ID.

The Makefile
------------

Now that you know how to compile and create disk images, you can put it
together in a makefile.

    TARGETS := foo
    C1541 := /Applications/Vice64/tools/c1541
    X64 := open /Applications/Vice64/x64.app

    .PRECIOUS: %.d64

    all: $(TARGETS)

    %.prg: %.asm
      acme --cpu 6510 --format cbm --outfile $@ $<

    %.d64: %.prg
      $(C1541) -format foo,id d64 $@ -write $<

    %: %.d64
      $(X64) $<

    clean:
      rm -f $(TARGETS) *.prg *.d64

If you have a file `foo.asm` in the same directory, you can type

    $ make foo

to compile `foo.prg`, put it into a `foo.d64` disk image and run it from VICE.
Since the `prg`-file is an implicit target, `make` will delete it before
executing the code. You can keep it with `make foo.prg` or by adding it to
`.PRECIOUS`.

You can also launch VICE and run the code the old-fashioned way.  This
*requires* a disk image. From VICE, open the file browser to mount the image,
then do

    LOAD "$",8
    LIST

to list the disk contents. Then do

    LOAD "FOO.PRG",8,1
    RUN

to load and run the program. While loading, hit Command-W to enter warp speed,
making it load faster, then disable warp mode again before running the code.

A BASIC loader
--------------

The `.prg` file format is very simple: It starts with a two-byte memory address
which the rest of the contents are loaded into. You have to specify the
secondary load argument `,1` to make sure the contents are loaded into this
memory address: The default is to load the contents into the start of BASIC
memory at `$0801`, meaning it expects the `.prg` file to contain just a BASIC
program. The usual trick is to add a small BASIC program at the beginning of
the `.prg` that just jumps to the real assembly program in memory.

So, if your assembly program is set to start at `$0900`, then the `.prg` file
will contain

    <$0801 (two-byte load address)>
    <a small BASIC program, e.g. "10 SYS 2304", where $0900 = 2304>
    <filler space ...>
    <your assembly program starting at, e.g. $0900>

You can omit the starting BASIC program in your files if you're very clever,
but most programs seem to use this trick.

You can see some example files at <a
href="https://github.com/cslarsen/c64-examples">https://github.com/cslarsen/c64-examples</a>.

The BASIC loader I use there is given below. It may be a bit much to understand
as a first tutorial, but it just encodes a `10 SYS <start address>` program:

    ; A BASIC booter, encodes `10 SYS <address>`.
    ; Macroified from http://www.pouet.net/topic.php?which=6541

    !source "constants.asm"

    !macro start_at .address {
      * = basic
      !byte $0c,$08,$00,$00,$9e
      !if .address >= 10000 { !byte 48 + ((.address / 10000) % 10) }
      !if .address >=  1000 { !byte 48 + ((.address /  1000) % 10) }
      !if .address >=   100 { !byte 48 + ((.address /   100) % 10) }
      !if .address >=    10 { !byte 48 + ((.address /    10) % 10) }
      !byte $30 + (.address % 10), $00, $00, $00
      * = .address
    }

    ; A cooler example is to write
    ;
    ;   10 SYS <address>: REM <backspaces>Your comment
    ;
    ; When the user types LIST, he will just see
    ;
    ;   10 Your comment
    ;
    ; but still be able to run it.
    ; For this, see http://codebase64.org/doku.php?id=base:acme-macro-tu

The contents of `constants.asm` is just some memory mapped locations for the
start of BASIC memory and foreground and background colors. By writing to the
color locations, you can change the colors.

    ;; Start of BASIC program
    basic = $0801

    ;; Background color
    bgcol = $d021

    ;; Border color
    bocol = $d020

Example code
------------

To use the BASIC booter, include the file and invoke the macro with `+start_at
<address>`:

    !source "basic-boot.asm"

    +start_at $0900

    ; Set background and border to black
    ldx #$00
    stx bgcol
    stx bocol

    ; Flicker border and background
    .loop
      inc bgcol
      inc bocol
      jmp .loop

It wraps the loader in an ACME macro `start_at`. The main assembly here starts
at `$0900`, meaning it loads super fast: The BASIC loader starts `$0801` and
the rest of the code at `$0900`. Now, the `.PRG` file format simply consists of
a destination address in memory to load the file contents into. If the space
between your BASIC loader (which *must* start at `$0801`) and your entry point
is huge, then you'll waste space, and the file will take forever to load, even
if you're using warp mode in your emulator. If you need more space, let the
first `.PRG` file be a loader so your program gets up and running quickly.

If you put the above code into `flicker.asm`, using the above makefile you can
now run it by typing

    $ make flicker
    acme --cpu 6510 --format cbm --outfile flicker.prg flicker.asm
    /Applications/Vice64/tools/c1541 -format foo,id d64 flicker.d64 -write flicker.prg
    Unit: 0
    Formatting in unit 8...
    Writing file `FLICKER.PRG' as `FLICKER.PRG' to unit 8.
    open /Applications/Vice64/x64.app flicker.d64
    rm flicker.prg

The output is given below

<img class="u-max-full-width"
     src="/gfx/post/c64-loading.png"
     alt="Commodore 64 loading screen">

<img class="u-max-full-width"
     src="/gfx/post/c64-flicker.png"
     alt="Demo running on a Commodore 64, showing flickering colors">

What next?
----------

The only thing you need now is a lot of time on your hands, a good C64
reference manual and memory map, and you're set for hours of fun (*after*
you've made a stable raster, of course).
